Add specification document style guide (#2884)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: styleguide.md

# Modelica Specification style guide

This is the style guide for the Modelica Specification document.

## Document format and tool chain

The source format of the document is LaTeX, and the source is processed by both pdfLaTeX and LaTeXML.

> It is good to be aware of the LaTeXML implications, but for most contributors and contributions is is considered sufficient to only check that the pdfLaTeX output looks good, the idea being that potential problems should be spotted in the pull request review process.

Reviewer: Double "is"
```suggestion
It is good to be aware of the LaTeXML implications, but for most contributors and contributions it is considered sufficient to only check that the pdfLaTeX output looks good, the idea being that potential problems should be spotted in the pull request review process.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I believe we already here should add that _there should be no trailing spaces_ (as that is part of the checks in the tool-chain).

Author: Very good suggestion!  Please have a look add added rules for trailing space and empty lines.

Author: Based on verbal communication with @HansOlsson, I think that this should be considered resolved.

## Source code formatting

The document is in ongoing transition to _one sentence per line_ source code formatting.
This means that any modified or new text should have each sentence alone on a single physical line in the source file.
Once we have the physical line breaks in the correct places, the diffs of future changes will become clean and easy to grasp.

> When indenting the contents of a LaTeX environment, an indentation of 2 spaces used.

Reviewer 2: Should be "is used" or something similar.

Author: Yes, added "is".  Resolving.

Appearance | LaTeX source
--- | ---
the keyword `each` | `the keyword \lstinline!each!`
declared as `final` | `declared as \lstinline!final!`

### Named functions and operators

When referencing a named function of operator, hyphenation is not used, and it is common to not combine with any describing word:

Appearance | LaTeX source
--- | ---
the `smooth` operator | `the \lstinline!smooth! operator`
where `pre` is not explicitly used | `where \lstinline!pre! is not explicitly used`

### Other things, special cases

Incomplete list of various terminology with special formatting rules:

Appearance | LaTeX source | Comment
--- | --- | ---
start value | `start value` | Value of the `start`-attribute (there could be exceptions!)
reduction expression | `reduction expression` |
base class | `base class` | Similarly: derived class
base-clock | `base-clock` | Similarly: sub-cock

## Definitions

New terminology is either introduced with a `definition` environment, or as part of the running text.
When part of the running text, the introduced terminology should be marked with `\firstuse` at the point of the definition.

> (The use of `\firstuse` helps us both produce consistent formatting and keep track of things that should appear in the document index.)

Reviewer: Should `\firstuse` be followed by `\index`?

Reviewer 2: I would say that should normally be the case.
The alternative would be to modify firstuse to do that automatically and add that information to the style-guide (to avoid double-index).

Author: My experience has been that the form used with `\firstuse` isn't always the form one wants in the index.  I added text saying that, as a general rule, `\firstuse` should be used in combination with `\index`.  OK?

> If the new terminology is used before being introduced, the first use should be marked with `\willintroduce` to alert the reader that this is not a term that is expected to be known yet by a first-time reader.

Reviewer: When I first read that I thought it meant: `\firstuse(some term)\willintroduce`. Maybe making it a bit more explicit?
```suggestion
If the new terminology is used before being introduced, it should be marked with `\willintroduce` (instead of `\firstuse`) to alert the reader that this is not a term that is expected to be known yet by a first-time reader.
```
Or giving an example?

Reviewer 2: Seems like a good suggestion. I don't think an example is needed.

Non-semantical font switching commands for producing italics (`\textit`, `\textsl`, `\itshape`) should pretty much never be used.

Note that the document is full of text set in italics, since this is used for both non-normative text and examples, through the `nonnormative` and `example` environments.

### Use of boldface

Non-semantical font switching commands for producing boldface (`\textbf`, `\bfseries`) may only be used for styling as part of higher level semantic constructs such as the _amsthm.sty_ `\newtheoremstyle` definitions.
For purposes of marking emphasis, see use of `\emph` instead.

### Ordinals

Ordinals are written with _th_ in normal font, possibly combined with a math styled expression for the number:
```
Fixed ordinals: 1st, 2nd, 3rd.
Symbolic ordinals: $n$th, $(n+1)$th.
```

## Code listings

### Modelica listings

Modelica listings are written with indentation in steps of 2 spaces.

A space is typically added on each side of a binary operator, and after comma.

Code snippets may start with an indented line as long as there's some line in the listing with zero indentation, like this:
```
  Real x(start = 1.0, fixed = true);
equation
  der(x) = -x;
```

> Each line should fit within the width of the page, using hard line breaks and manual indentation of continued lines to meet this requirement.

Reviewer: "using hard line breaks...": It should either be "use" or should be followed by "is recommended" or "is required".

Reviewer 2: I agree, and I would say prefer 'use'

Author: OK, I made it two sentences.  OK?

When part of the running text, the introduced terminology should be marked with `\firstuse` at the point of the definition.
As a general rule, `\firstuse` should appear in combination with `\index` for adding the term to the document index.
(The use of `\firstuse` instead of just `\emph` helps us both produce consistent formatting and makes it easier to spot cases where the additional use of `\index` has been forgotten.
The reason that `\firstuse` doesn't also do the job calling `\index` is that the form of the term presented to `\firstuse` isn't always in the base form expected in the document index, that there can be a need for special styling tricks in the `\index` argument, etc.)

If the new terminology is used before being introduced, it should be marked with `\willintroduce` (instead of `\firstuse`) to alert the reader that this is not a term that is expected to be known yet by a first-time reader.

## Miscellaneous

### Use of `\emph` and italics

To put emphasis on a word or small piece of text, use `\emph`.

Italics is used when new terminology is introduced in the running text instead of the bulkier `definition` environment, see `\firstuse` and `\willintroduce`.

> Non-semantical font switching commands for producing italics (`\textit`, `\textsl`, `\itshape`) should pretty much never be used.

Reviewer 2: "... should pretty much never used" seems like an awkward phrase. Why not something simple as
"Refrain from using non-semantical font switching commands for producing italics (...).

For purposes of marking emphasis, see use of `\emph` instead.

### Ordinals

Ordinals are written with _th_ in normal font, possibly combined with a math styled expression for the number:
```tex
Fixed ordinals: 1st, 2nd, 3rd.
Symbolic ordinals: $n$th, $(n+1)$th.
```

## Code listings

### Modelica listings

Modelica listings are written with indentation in steps of 2 spaces.

A space is typically added on each side of a binary operator, and after comma.

Code snippets may start with an indented line as long as there's some line in the listing with zero indentation, like this:
```
  Real x(start = 1.0, fixed = true);
equation
  der(x) = -x;
```

Each line should fit within the width of the page.
Use hard line breaks and manual indentation of continued lines to meet this requirement.

### Grammar (extended BNF) listings

Grammar listings use the `language=grammar`, and are written with indentation in steps of 3 spaces:
```tex
\begin{lstlisting}[language=grammar]
stored-definition :
   [ within [ name ] ";" ]
   { [ final ] class-definition ";" }
\end{lstlisting}
```

When a grammar rule is mentioned in the text, the rule shall be formatted with the _grammar_ language:

> ```tex

Author: Reverted.  Resolving.

```
The node shall contain a \lstinline[language=grammar]!stored-definition! that…
```

## English natural language text

This section gives guidelines for how the natural language text in English should be written.

> The text is written in American English.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this is fully correct, and I believe we often had a more complicated description. 
Clearly we often use American **spelling** (meter, color &c).

Author: OK, but I think it makes sense to state as much as we can.  If it's clear that we use American spelling, what would the reason be to not commit to American English more generally?

Reviewer 2: I believe that was discussed previously with a more complicated conclusion, but couldn't find that.
For MSL we recently found no conclusion https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaStandardLibrary/issues/2750

Author: OK, that's a very relevant background.  Maybe one needs to be more pragmatic and take the view that also American English isn't a static thing; they used to spell it _behavior_, but nowadays they tend to spell it _behaviour_ instead?

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't it be simpler to just write that 'The text primarily uses American English spelling' and not overstate this?

Author: I agree that such a formulation would be better than trying to define our own dialect of Popular Modeling English.

However, having read more on this topic in various places, I've become convinced that the right thing to do is to simply pick American English, even though it doesn't come with the most popular spelling for every word.  It seems to generally be considered the only way of being perceived as consistent, which I find much more important than being able to pick _behaviour_ just because it's an increasingly popular spelling.

Reviewer 2: There are a number of other minor differences; but it seems simpler to just close this and hope that it will not lead to too many changes.
